Set...
It's not how you start,
it's how you finish.
The old adage is true for
every sport in the Olympics,
be it taekwondo...
..table tennis...
..or triathlon.
While a good start
in any event is important...
..the real glory is at the end.
A gold medal may be the
ultimate glory in the Olympics.
But sometimes something
remarkable comes along
to remind us of the true
Olympic spirit.
Something that shows Pierre
De Coubertin's original vision.
In 1992, British athlete
Derek Redmond
was one of those taking
part in the 400 metres.
Derek had missed
out on taking part
in Seoul 1988 by mere minutes.
An injury meant that he
withdrew
and watched from the sidelines
as Steve Lewis won gold
for the US.
But that was in the past.
By Barcelona 1992,
Derek was injury-free
and determined to win
a place on the podium.
That wasn't something
unfeasible either -
he had already shown
he was no stranger to winning.
The year before, in 1991,
he was part of the British
4 x 400m relay team
that had won gold
at the World Championships,
and Derek was confident
he could add to that success at
the Olympics.
His first heat was a solid run,
with his quickest time
in the last four years.
A great start to the Games.
By the second heat, Derek was
starting to find his groove.
He won his heat again,
and looked like he still had
plenty of gas left in the tank.
Once it was time for the
semifinals,
Derek was confident he would
be racing in the 400m final.
He just had to get through
this last test.
I had a great warm-up, stride
and everything went well,
came out on the track, put my
blocks down, no problems,
told us to strip down,
stripped down.
Then you have the little bit
where you're standing
in your lane
and they come and shove
a camera in your face
so everyone can
see who you are,
blocked that out
and everything.
He said, "On your marks,
get set..."
Listos...
The race started well.
I couldn't believe that
I was running that quick.
It's hard to tell positions
in the 400m
due to the staggering
of the athletes,
but Derek was holding his own,
well within the time he would
need to qualify for the final.
Then it happened.
The next thing I heard
was a funny pop.
Derek knew immediately
that he was in trouble.
The funny pop had been
his hamstring tearing.
A few more steps and
he fell to the floor in agony.
In severe pain, Derek could
only hold his head in his hands
as the other competitors
sprinted to the finish.
DEREK: I watched them
go over the line,
and obviously I knew it was
over.
Four years of hard work and
waiting,
and it was all over in the most
painful way possible.
But Derek had not travelled all
this way
to not finish another race.
The bitter memory of
missing out in Seoul
had stayed with him.
As medics came
to help him off the track,
Derek refused to go out
without a fight.
Obviously in pain, he was going
to finish this race,
no matter what it took.
But Derek wouldn't have to
finish this race on his own.
Barging his way through the
stands came his father, Jim,
desperate to help his son
in any way he could.
Derek struggled through the
pain
to embrace the man who had
done so much for his career.
The pair continued
down the last 100m.
Back in Derek's home town,
Northampton,
the sight of seeing her brother
and father
struggle so dramatically
sent Derek's pregnant sister
into labour
earlier than expected.
In great pain,
and struggling to move,
Derek was in floods of tears
as he finally crossed the line.
But the crowd roared the pair
on.
And while Derek may have failed
in his bid to win a medal,
finishing the way that he did
made him an instant celebrity.
The sight of Derek
using his father as a crutch
has become one of
the enduring Olympic images.
People gave Derek messages of
support from around the world,
praising his sportsmanship
and perseverance.
It was the ultimate show
of the Olympic spirit.
Competing against the pain,
despite the heartbreak,
not for the glory of winning,
but to cross that finish line,
and proving you don't
have to be a gold medallist
to be an Olympic hero.